very excited to talk to you about the
world engines
lab which I've recently started at grey
area this talk is basically going to be
focused on new practices in simulation
simulated worlds new practices in
artificial
intelligence and new artistic practices
and how they all weave together there's
a kind of quasy secret yeah and when
we're talking about um simulated worlds
there are three
things that the lab is focused on player
Behavior agents and agent
behavior and simulated nature that
nature might be from actual data or just
an imitation of what we observe from
nature and the sort of secret dream of
of the lab is that we can produce a kind
of harmonious
co-evolution between these three
different constituent
parts and that maybe through doing that
it will have some extra simulation
ramifications perhaps there will be
something instructive in this for us
outside of these simulated worlds that
we're
building whether or not you believe that
it's a large claim either way each of
these components are really interesting
and each one of these components are
evolving very
rapidly so my uh simulation technology
of choice is Unreal Engine very easy to
use for the most part or easy to begin
at least um extremely incredible
lighting High Fidelity many many
different tools inside it uh
incredible uh ways of working in virtual
reality with like billions of polygons
and you don't have to car about it it's
a it's an interesting
tool and I think that when you have an
artist working with this
tool thanks when you have an artist
working with this tool you get pieces
like
this um this is the entangled Forest by
Jonathan
s and this piece takes place in a
post-apocalyptic
Canada there's not much left of
humankind here uh what are left is two
different like raccoon tribes one of
them is nomadic and then the other one
is sort of symbios with these different
white mushrooms you see in the
environment and this
environment is a simulation that just
plays in real time it plays itself out
these two different tribes migrate
cooperate compete there are cameras in
their point of view cameras floating
around and we basically automatically
generate Cinema from this artificial
life
environment and events also do occur for
example the ghost of humankind does make
an appearance and does affect what
happens in the
world um and so this is essentially an
artificial life simulation that turns
into a film and turns into a film in
different ways every time you run
it so art is learning from Worlds and
art is specifically learning from all
these new developments in World building
people are building games performances
hybrid performances performances in
World audio visual sets virtual theater
theater that's here but also in the
world and forms of games that you really
couldn't create
before uh one of my favorite artists of
all time actually is Muka muko Taiwanese
artist and she does audio visual sets
and these these audio visual sets she
performs um she performs live and people
can manipulate parts of her team members
can manipulate the monster or God behind
her also in real time or pre-recorded
and then sometimes she's performing live
but she also has a multiplayer world at
her back where people are tuning in from
all over the world and interacting with
these agents and with each other so it's
this like incredible performance of a
world
I really recommend you check out her
work uh there's another piece which is a
retelling of the uracy myth done in VR
and this is a little bit of a nod to
Virtual theater this is a single player
virtual uh virtual reality piece but
many people are currently making pieces
like this in
multiplayer so all of us in the crowd
have our headsets on are wandering
around this environment it's sort of
like sleep no more in New York but fully
[Music]
digital
and I think something that I'm showing
here is that even though this is a
lightweight environment in other ways
it's kind of High Fidelity and these
High Fidelity environments are becoming
more and more
ubiquitous there's um another group down
at sarch sarch is a place in Los Angeles
it's architecture school where I get a
lot of inspiration from the work that
they're making um this is life forms.
Dom John uh is one of the people who's
working on this team and they're working
on a game that just you couldn't have
made this game before uh because these
tools are now more accessible you
basically make the game and then you
pitch the studios afterwards before you
would need to pitch the studios to get
the money to make the game it's not the
case anymore um this game basically is
about a form of like uh Slavic
cosmism um and like sort of Eastern
European transhumanism and you're
navigating this enormous seed Vault
trying to sort of understand this like
very very large story but the
environments themselves are are are very
gorgeous and I just wanted to show them
to
you so we've talked about um simulation
Technologies but we're also talking
about AI Technologies because they have
begun to influence these things and are
going to influence these things more and
more and specifically I'm talking about
machine learning reinforcement learning
llms and action
models and the most obvious way that
they're doing this is through rapid
prototyping it's it's clear that when
you can use text to image to make a
texture or text to 3D to make an object
that you can more quickly put into a
game world it's speeds up the process of
producing these
simulations obviously um there are
multiple lawsuits going on right now
between the people whose data has been
gathered and the corporations who are
turning that data into tools and I think
that these lawsuit lawsuits are
excellent um I think that this I'm glad
that this is hitting that part of our
society hitting the law because we
should be talking about the value of
these things and how they're
created um another uh technology that's
getting easier and easier to use is high
FID you know uh simulations of High
Fidelity humans um unreal has a tool
called metahuman that allows you to make
these rigged models very very quickly
bring them into the engine and then
puppet them or you know make them behave
or speak also motion capture which is
based on uh the new forms of motion
capture are based on computer vision an
optit track motion capture system cost
like $100,000 the new Roco Co suit costs
$7,000 and the system that's being
developed that uses the webcam and
computer vision it's like $20 a month we
don't have fingers or face yet being
able to easily stream into Unreal Engine
but it's
coming
so it it was important to say that
because it's just an important part of
what is changing the field but the thing
that's most interesting to me is that
there are now new possibilities in agent
Behavior so I do a lot of Contracting in
the space and one tool that I use a lot
is called inworld um inworld is a system
that takes a large language model puts
it inside of the head of the character
allows you to modify it in certain ways
so the character can um describe its
relationship with other characters
describe its relationship with the world
talk about your relationship with it and
at this point it has a naive form of
long-term memory but there will be more
sophisticated forms of long-term memory
in
development
um hey I'm V who are you do you come
here
often
I'm micho an arasaka executive
surprisingly amidst the concrete and
neon I find solace in this park where
the chaos of night City Fades away if
only for a
moment so basically somebody was taking
cyberpunk 2077 taking one of the NPCs
plugging it into the inworld engine so
that it could extemporize about the
world but that is just language I think
the thing that's actually most
interesting is Ai and behavior and it's
something that hasn't really been
discussed I think enough in the public
discourse but I think it will impact us
more and more over time so there's one
technology called Deep reinforcement
learning it's been around since about
2013 with the invention of something
called Q learning um and it is a way for
an AI to evolve Behavior meaning I don't
explicitly program it it programs itself
it can act creatively in the environment
I don't tell it what to do most game AI
which is high distinct you give you give
an AI seven choices and it chooses among
those things based on certain States
this evolves new actions which you
wouldn't have before um this is a very
famous very famous video from open AI I
think it's 2016 or something like that
but it basically describes how agents
play themselves in simulation over and
over and over billions and billions and
billions of times and evolve complex
Behavior must learn to collaborate
there's a hiding agent seing agent first
they figure out how to block the doors
the only who canar but then of course
the seeking agent figures out how to
surf into the place where the other
agents have hidden and so on and so
forth eventually they end up
just building they um end up building
their own shelters and structures and
then the other agents are figuring out
how to surf objects to get on top of
them and this could go at infinum learn
um the most recent developments in this
space of AI and behavior are the mixture
of deep reinforcement learning and large
language
models um there's a newow scholar a new
model called Voyager are you seeing what
I there's a new model called Voyager was
released this year where basically an
agent is navigating Minecraft and GPT is
writing code into the agent's head while
it is navigating Minecraft
and as the agent encounters things it
gets sent to the large language model
and then the large language model writes
code in real time that can allow that
agent to better Traverse the space that
agent is highly effective at mastering a
very complex Tech Tree um traveling all
throughout the space um and it refines
all of its actions through deep
reinforcement learning so it's this
complex system that can exhibit very
creative and generative behavior in a
very open-ended
environment um very open-ended
environment um so I think all of this is
leading us
to this idea of foundational action
models I have the suspicion that just as
we have large language models where you
can give them so many different kinds of
prompts and they can respond
intelligently in so many different ways
I think we're going to have a
foundational action model and I think
that model you'll be able to drop it
into almost any kind of virtual
environment and it will be able to act
creatively within that
environment
um there are lots of studies but there's
not the time of small versions of this
or us being on the way to this if you're
interested you know we can talk about it
uh but the big question here is what
does it mean to have agents that can
speak
extemporaneously remember and act
creatively in a simulated
world I don't think that it's inherently
utopian or dystopian I think it depends
on who's controlling the agent how it is
deployed what data it has pulled in
there's sort of like a whole another
talk that could be done here about the
politics and economics of these kinds of
agents and maybe I will sometime I think
that that's a good thing to
discuss right now one what I want to
focus on is that these these new systems
are inherently relational and I think
that they're inherently
ecological and that I think that we
should use these new systems to look at
how humans agents and nature interact
with each other in simulation and I
think that we should use them to
experiment with this idea of harmonious
co-evolution and what I mean by that is
that player strategies across the game
always change the player community
always change changes and develops new
strategies but now agents can also
develop new strategies and co-evolve
with players as they both seek to
transform shape architect terraform
whatever create a story inside of the
world but these two relationships should
be put in dialogue with the natural
world inside the simulation so that
they're doing all these tasks in ways
that are more in alignment with the flow
of natural
systems here's a couple examples just to
make it really concrete agents can learn
to sense and monitor nature inside of a
simulation better and better over time
if they're learning agents and
communicate with the players what their
action you know the ramifications of
their actions in the world agents can
act to protect nature and get better and
better at protecting nature and can push
back with Force against players inside
of the simulated world that are
encroaching upon nature or objectifying
nature agents can learn maybe to build
settlements while using the smallest
amount of resources possible
collaborating with human players to
teach them how to do that kind of a task
or you know in another sort of science
fictional scenario agents build massive
settlements while only creating tiny
pockets for nature and um tiny pockets
for humankind so again there's like
another 30 minute talk here of all the
different kinds of relationships we can
explore between humans and agents and
nature and r those out and then make
films performances videos Hybrid Works
audio visual sets while those are
running so the lab is experimenting with
some of these these Technologies in the
top left corner there's a group of
spider robots that can do Nest
construction you can sort of place them
anywhere in a forest underwater on a
mountain and they will be able to build
these very complex and intricate
structures that player can interact with
this is not a piece of art this is a
demo of like pushing the technology and
trying to make it available for artists
in the top right corner there's a
terraforming system that can build a
mega structure from scratch in real time
inside of Unreal Engine you could have
many of these structures like radically
changing a world while people are
playing it you could have other agents
that are building nature inside of
inside of the system in the bottom left
corner uh is a game that I made that is
deploying some of these systems and how
you interact with these systems
radically changes the nature of the
story in the bottom right corner um is a
multi-agent deep reinforcement learning
system that has learned how to build a
tower all by itself pretty much without
human
intervention um so again I think it's
interesting to look at agents nature
humans and extrapolate all these
relationships inside of these
simulations but whether you buy this
idea or not we can just say simp
that because so much is changing a rush
of worlds are coming and whenever there
is a situation like this let's take
advantage of this moment to bring new
values into Visual and playable culture
if we're aware of what's happening and
we can get in there we can change how
discourse moves and folds over
time um in my practice I look at
different forms of Jewish futurism and
mysticism that's my background I look at
different ways that humans and machines
can relate to each other and I look at
sort of radical ways of approaching
gender all in the same sort of simulated
environment um this next piece does have
some flashing lights there is no strobe
but I'm just going to show a tiny little
chunk of it this is an example of um an
agent based system that I've turned into
an audio visual
performance we can
do oh
everything
anyway so the lab is really focused on
thanks the lab is really focused on some
of these utopic elements in my personal
practice I explore sort of positive and
the negative but either way we want to
help artists take advantage of these
developments um there's a lot of
different things that the lab is doing
we're building databases of best
practice we're Consulting with artists
we're building technical road maps so if
you're interested in learning how to do
this we can help you chart your way
through all these different technologies
that are constantly evolving uh
eventually we will probably build an
open source plugin of some of the game
AI tools and in the best case scenario
we will build a high fidelity World
building toolkit using more
sophisticated AI techniques we'll have
to see how it plays
out uh on a final note here there's lots
of ways to become involved in the lab we
do a lot of hacking with games and Ai
and ecology we have a reading group
there's a presentation night we always
need help with grant writing business
development um and help running more
public events and workshops also I'm
upstairs I'm here quite often if you're
interested in these themes and you want
to just have a cup of tea let's me touch
Let's Do It um my website is delta.
Center my Instagram is delta. Arc those
are easy ways to get in touch and the
lab is also written about extensively on
the gray area website thank you so much
for your
time